---
layout: post.html 
title: Data Visualization Update
---

I've made some more updates to my [KenPom
visualization](../../../../../pages/kpvis.html) and used it to capture a
few observations (perhaps very obvious ones) from the last year in
college basketball.

\!END-SUMMARY\!

The visualization still isn't a masterpiece of graphic design but it's
at a point where it's largerly functional and I'd like to move on to
some other projects for the time being. There are more explanations on
the page itself so [check it out](../../../../../pages/kpvis.html) and
let me know what you think in the comments or via email/twitter. A
reminder that the visualization is only exploratory and isn't an attempt
to find correlations between the x and y axis (or the circle radius).

## Three Observations

Here are some things I noticed while building and playing with the
visualization, let me know if you find any other good stories in the
comments:

**1. Kentucky - Wichita State was the "best" game of the NCAA Tournament
(and probably the whole season)**

![Kentucky Wichita St. Data
Visualization](/images/Kentucky-Wichita-St.png)

"Best" is a tricky term to define when talking about sports in general.
But anyone watching this game could tell you that the numbers confirm
what they saw: two lauded teams, a game that remained close throughout,
and plenty of offense. The statistics don't even account for the
"Wichita State can't do it against real competition" media meme which
probably upped the stakes even more prior to tipoff. This game shows up
in the top-right hand corner of the visualization and has a Hype rating
of 9 so I was glad to see the data I was using match my experience of
watching the game. Although it didn't have the highest
[Drama](http://drewbo.com/blog/2014/04/28/kenpom-drama/) score of the
tournament (that was Wisconsin-Arizona), the pace and scoring made the
game a lot more compelling.

**2. The Big Ten and SEC both had a particularly nail-biting March
Madness**

![Kentucky Michigan Data Visualization](/images/Kentucky-Michigan.png)

![Tennessee Iowa Data Visualization](/images/Tennessee-Iowa.png)

In part due to three crazy games between them (Kentucky-Michigan,
Kentucky-Wisconsin, and Tennessee-Iowa), both the Big Ten and the SEC
have many tournament games off to the right side of the graph (high
Drama scores). I'm not positive which conference actually had the
highest average Drama or eFG% but I may pull that in the future to test
whether this is a purely visual phenomenom. Shout out to the A10 for
having some barn burners as well despite being less heralded. Tournament
darling Dayton contributed to this but also St. Joseph's, who [nearly
knocked
out](http://www.cbssports.com/collegebasketball/eye-on-college-basketball/24516910/saint-josephs-was-one-rebound-away-from-killing-uconns-story)
eventual champions Connecticut in the first round.

**3. Syracuse - Duke (part 1) delivered on the hype**

![Syracuse Duke Data Visualization](/images/Syracuse-Duke.png)

  - The most "hyped" game of the year, according to [my somewhat flawed
    metric](http://drewbo.com/blog/2014/05/05/first-data-vis/), was the
    first Syracuse-Duke matchup as the teams entered as the number 2 and
    3 ranked KenPom squads respectively. The AP ratings were a bit more
    divergent (2 and 17) but I don't think anyone was exactly
    discounting Duke coming into this game. And according to the lede of
    the AP story:  
    SYRACUSE, N.Y. -- Coach K said he hoped this game would live up to
    its billing. It did, and then some.

It was definitely among the most dramatic games (top 2%) and the eFG%
was suprisingly high for a Syracuse game (top 15%) making it a very
noticable large dot on the chart.
